For a begginer it can be a very hard time looking in a profile generated by the tool like perf or Intel Vtune Amplifier. It immediately throws at you lots of strange terms, which you might not know. Whenever I'm presenting to the audience or speaking with somebody who is not very much involved into performance analysis activities, they ask the same basic questions. Like: "What is instruction retired?" or "What is reference cycles?". So, I decided to write an article describing some of unobvious terms connected with performance analysis.

### Mispredicted branch

### Instruction retired

https://software.intel.com/en-us/forums/intel-vtune-amplifier-xe/topic/311170
https://software.intel.com/en-us/vtune-amplifier-help-instructions-retired-event
 
### UOP 
issued executed retired 

From Agner Fog

Uop or μop is an abbreviation for micro-operation. Processors with out-of-order cores are capable of splitting complex instructions into μops. For example, a read-modify instruction may be split into a read-μop and a modify-μop. The number of μops that an instruction generates is important when certain bottlenecks in the pipeline limit the number of μops per clock cycle.

Uops can be [MacroFused]() and [MicroFused](). 

### Reference cycle 

https://stackoverflow.com/questions/43356721/papi-what-does-clock-reference-cycles-mean
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dynamic_frequency_scaling
https://software.intel.com/en-us/forums/software-tuning-performance-optimization-platform-monitoring/topic/597903

The hardware event for "reference cycles not halted" counts at the same rate as the TSC, but only counts while the processor core is not halted (while the TSC always counts).  This makes it very convenient to compute the number of cycles (or the fraction of the cycles) that the processor *is* halted.

$ perf stat -e cycles,ref-cycles,bus-cycles -a sleep 5
 Performance counter stats for 'system wide':

         145444295      cycles                                                      
         175726000      ref-cycles                                                  
           2052531      bus-cycles                                                  

       5,003911237 seconds time elapsed

$ perf stat -e cycles,ref-cycles,bus-cycles -a ls
 Performance counter stats for 'system wide':

         115316881      cycles                                                      
         112140700      ref-cycles                                                  
           1332049      bus-cycles                                                  

       0,017348524 seconds time elapsed

You can also make an interesing experiment: open 3 terminals and run corresponding commands:
1. perf stat -e cycles -a -I 1000
2. perf stat -e ref-cycles -a -I 1000
3. perf stat -e bus-cycles -a -I 1000
Place them in such a way that all 3 will be visible. Then open another terminal in which start to do some work. You will notice how the collected values will be changing over time. It will give you an idea how the state of the CPU is changing.

### Clock_unhalted 



### CPI & IPC 

Insert formula (from videoportal)

### Instruction latency and throughput

From Agner Fog.

Draw a table with pipeline diagramm.

The latency of an instruction is the delay that the instruction generates in a dependency chain. The measurement unit is clock cycles. 
Where the clock frequency is varied dynamically, the figures refer to the core clock frequency. The numbers listed are minimum values. Cache misses, misalignment, and exceptions may increase the clock counts considerably

The throughput is the maximum number of instructions of the same kind that can be executed per clock cycle when the operands of each instruction are independent of the preceding instructions

### Uncore (offcore)
